Pioetry (derived from the Greek poiesis, "making"), 
also called verse,[note 1] is a form of literature that uses aesthetic and often rhythmic qualities of language − such as phonaesth
et
ics, sound symbolism, and metre − to evoke meani
ngs in addition to, or in place of, a prosai
c ostensible meaning. A poem is a literary c
omposition, written by a poet, using this principle.

Poetry has a long and varied history, evolvi
ng differentially across the globe. It dates 
back at least to prehistoric times with 
hunting poetry in Africa, and to panegyric a
nd elegiac court poetry of the empires of the 
Nile, Niger, and Volta River valleys.[4] Som
e of the earliest written poetry in Africa 
occurs among the Pyramid Texts written durin
g the 25th century BCE. The earliest surviving 
Western Asian epic poetry, the Epic of Gilga
mesh, was written in Sumerian.

Early poems in the Eurasian continent evolve
d from folk songs such as the Chinese Shiiin
g, as well as religious hymns or from a need to retell oral epics,
as with the Egyptian Story of Sinuhe, the Indian epic poetry, and
the Homeric epics, the Iliad and the Odyssey. A
ncient Greek attempts to define poetry, such as Aris
totle's Poetics, focused on the uses of speech
in rhetoric, drama, song, and comedy. Later attem
pts concentrated on features such as repetition,
 verse form, and rhyme, and emphasized the aest
 hetics which distinguish poetry from more ob
 iectively-informative prosaic writing.

Poetry uses forms and conventions to suggest d
ifferential interpretations of words, or to ev
oke emotive responses. Devices such as asson
ance, alliteration, onomatopoeia, and rhythm 
may convey musical or incantatory effects. The
 use of ambiguity, symbolism, irony, and other
  stylistic elements of poetic diction of
ten leaves a poem open to multiple interpretat
ions. Similarly, figures of speech such as meta
phor, simile, and metonymy[5] establish a reson
ance between otherwise disparate images—a layer
ing of meanings, forming connections previously
 not perceived. Kindred forms of resonance may 
 exist, between individual verses, in their patterns of rhyme or rhythm.

Some poetry types are unique to particular cul
tures and genres and respond to characteristics of
the language in which the poet writes. Readers 
accustomed to identifying poetry with Dante, G
oethe, Mickiewicz, or Rumi may think of it as 
written in lines based on rhyme and regular me
ter. There are, however, traditions, such as 
Biblical poetry, that use other means to c
reate rhythm and euphony. Much modern poetry 
reflects a critique of poetic tradition,[6] 
testing the principle of euphony itself or 
altogether forgoing rhyme or set rhythm.[7][8] 
In an increasingly globalized world, poets 
often adapt forms, styles, and techniques 
from diverse cultures and languages. Poets 
have contributed to the evolution of the l
inguistic, expressive, and utilitarian qualities of their languages.

A Western cultural tradition (extending at 
least from Homer to Rilke) associates 
the production of poetry with inspiration – 
often by a Muse (either classical or contemporary).

In many poems, the lyrics are spoken by a 
character, who is called the speaker. This 
concept differentiates the speaker (character) 
from the poet (author), which is usually an 
important distinction: for example, if the 
poem runs I killed a man in Reno, it is the 
speaker who is the murderer, not the poet himself. 